# Croissance verte

*Sources*

- [Is Green Growth Possible?](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13563467.2019.1598964?journalCode=cnpe20) - Hickel et Kallis (2019)

---


# Décroissance

*Sources*

- [Research On Degrowth](https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-environ-102017-025941) - Kallis et al (2018)
- [Imaginaries of Hope: The Utopianism of Degrowth](https://www.jstor.org/stable/24537850) - Kallis et al (2015)
- The future is Degrowth
- La décroissance et ses déclinaisons
- [1.5 °C degrowth scenarios suggest the need for new mitigation pathways](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-22884-9) - Keyßer & Lenzen (2021)
- [Degrowth can work — here’s how science can help](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-022-04412-x) - Hickel et al (2022)

---

- Degrowth signals a radical political and economic reorganization leading to reduced resource and energy use. The degrowth hypothesis posits that such a trajectory of social transformation is necessary, desirable, and possible; the conditions of its realization require additional study.
- Degrowth: a process of political and social transformation that reduces a society's throughput while improving the quality of life
- Related scholarship critiques the ideology behind the dogma of economic growth; contributes to documentation of negative material, social, and ecological effects of growth; and assesses alternatives to growth-based development (1). Put simply, the degrowth hypothesis is that it is possible to organize a transition and live well under a different political-economic system that has a radically smaller resource throughput.
- The impulse toward degrowth was also inspired by thinkers including Serge Latouche, an economist and critic of the Westernization of Africa, who popularized Décroissance through a series of books in the 1990s and 2000s that criticize economistic reasoning and the ideology of economic development
- Degrowth became a missile slogan for activists in France, Italy, and Spain, followed by other parts of Europe and beyond (2). A community of scholar-activists studying and practicing degrowth formed around a series of biannual international conferences starting in 2008. 
- The growth paradigm refers to the entrenched cognitive framework in which economic growth is constructed and conceived as necessary, good, and imperative
- Economic growth as a policy goal appeared in the 1950s (see collection of essays in 20), together with the development of accounting techniques and statistical tools designed to represent and measure it. Processes of state-sponsored economic statistics, particularly national income accounting, worked to mark the national economy as a well-defined object
- GDP has been characterized as a global abstraction that naturalized the nation state and became, such as the anthem and the flag, a symbol of national sovereignty (24). It rose to prominence between the 1930s and 1950s, linked to Keynesian efforts to counter the Great Depression and to plan expenditures for the Second World War and postwar reconstruction 
-  The limitations of GDP as a measure of wellbeing, or even of economic output, are widely known. GDP calculations increase not only with the flow of goods and services valued as “good,” but also with expenditures for social “bads,” such as prisons, disasters, epidemics, and oil spills. GDP does not count valuable unpaid work for subsistence or caretaking, nor ecosystem services, and ignores enjoyment of the commons, unless they are enclosed and commodified with monetary admission. What is less known is that the early founders of GDP were aware of these limitations, extremely cautious regarding universal applications, and wary of the statistic's ability to measure welfare, and to be used for comparisons over space and time. 
-  Unprecedented political focus on growth emerged in the early 1950s (first in the United States and somewhat later in Europe and Japan), giving rise to growthmanship, a form of politics focused primarily on the pursuit of economic growth as an all-embracing and overarching priority. 
-  GDP numbers were increasingly politicized as growth became a pivotal policy goal of governments in the context of Cold War competition, the pursuit of modern development, and pacification of class struggles. In the West, growth was instrumental to diffuse demands of the workers' movement, and in the East, to excuse the lack of democracy and the failure of more revolutionary ambitions 
-  The depth of that internalization became clear in the wake of environmental and social critiques and movements that challenged the growth paradigm in the late 1960s and early 1970s. 
-  Today GDP is not just an economic statistic, but a means to organize society on the assumption that only markets create wealth (21). Questioning GDP and searching for alternative indicators is not just a technical question, but a political and cultural project that requires significant reorganization of economic institutions, such as markets and ownership structures, as well as diverse sociocultural institutions that organize social security, social stratification, and prestige
-  The rise of the growth paradigm was integral to the invention of development and the “making of the Third World” (19, 32). Post-development scholars have shown how, starting with President Truman's 1949 inaugural address, large parts of the world (largely colonies or former colonies), were defined as underdeveloped, subject to development aid by those countries identified as developed. Backed by the first set of national income estimates (24), this division justified a range of interventionist policies.
-  degrowth is not only about downscaling energy and resource use, but also about an overall project of exiting economism (9), that is, decolonizing the social imaginary and liberating public debate from prevalent discourses couched in economic terms, privileging growth 
-  Although driven by political, institutional, and discursive processes, growth is also biophysical. The economic process converts energy, resources, and matter to goods, services, and waste (34). In theory, it seems possible to decouple material throughput from economic output by improving the resource efficiency of production. Ecological economists, however, argue that in practice absolute decoupling is unlikely, even though relative decoupling is common (34). Efficiency should not be confused with scale (35): The more efficiently we use resources, the lower they cost, and the more of them we end up using (36). This is, in essence, growth.
-  growth has been possible because fossil fuels did things human labor alone could not do. Ending the use of fossil fuels is likely to reduce labor productivity and limit output (34). Solar and wind power are constrained only by their rate of flow, but unlike fossil fuels, they are diffuse—more like rain than a lake (3). To collect and concentrate a diffuse flow of energy, more energy is necessary and more land is required. The EROIs (energy returns on energy investment) of renewable energies are between 10:1 and 20:1, compared to more than 50:1 for earlier deposits of oil and coal
-  cross-panel data analysis shows that overall, 1% growth of a national economy is associated with 0.6% to 0.8% increase in its carbon emissions (41) and 0.8% growth in its resource use 
-  As Jackson (50) showed in his seminal work, it is practically impossible to envisage viable climate mitigation scenarios that involve growth. This calls for research on managing, or prospering, without growth 
-  Some scenarios deem possible meeting climate targets while sustaining growth, but these generally assume after 2050 some sort of “negative emissions technology,” geo-engineering or otherwise. 
-  Is it possible to secure a decent standard of living for all while throughput and output degrow? Substantive evidence indicates that prosperity does not depend on high levels of production and consumption. Kubiszewski et al. (56) find that the Genuine Progress Indicator, an indicator that includes environmental and social costs alongside output, peaked in 1978, despite subsequent global growth. A similar indicator, the Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare, has stayed at the same levels in the United States since 1950, despite a threefold growth of GDP 
-  Wealthier countries on average have higher levels of life expectancy and education than poorer ones, but above a certain level of GDP, income does not make a difference in wellbeing—equality does. Satisfactory levels of wellbeing are achieved by countries such as Vietnam or Costa Rica at a fraction (one-third or less) of the output, energy, or resource use of countries such as the United States. Even the lower levels of resource use of mid-income countries, however, would not be sustainable if they were to be generalized to the planet as a whole. No country currently satisfies social wellbeing standards while staying within its share of planetary boundaries, suggesting that radical changes in provisioning systems are necessary 
-   the more equally income is distributed, the happier people are
-   Pro-environmental behaviors and sharing are also strongly associated with personal wellbeing (63). This suggests that an economic contraction may not impact wellbeing negatively if accompanied by redistribution, sharing, and value shifts 
-   Lack of growth does not mean lack of change. Zero change in net investments may entail increased investments in one sector (e.g., renewable energies), compensated by disinvestment in another (e.g., coal).
-   Jackson (50) paints an alternative picture of a “Cinderella economy” (p. 133) characterized by equality, reduced work, and ecological limits (p. 194). Paech (72) develops a more concrete vision of a postgrowth economy, where (a) the distance between producers and consumers is shortened with a strong regionalization of economic structures; (b) working hours are reduced and strategies to reduce consumption by repairing, sharing, and downscaling allow for higher wellbeing; (c) firms focus on preserving and repairing products rather than producing new ones; and (d) numerous policies support consumers and firms to follow these paths.
-   Integrated ecological-economic models are increasingly important sources of policy proposals. Victor (51) developed an econometric system-dynamics model to simulate low or negative growth paths that may be initiated by a set of economic policies including carbon taxes, reductions in average working hours, and a combination of progressive taxation and social spending. Scenarios of low or negative growth led to positive results measured by social and ecological indicators. 
-   Reductions of working hours are included in all major degrowth scenarios (51, 76). They are meant to prevent unemployment in nongrowing economies and free up time for reproductive, subsistence, social, and recreational activities
-   Capitalist economies do undergo prolonged periods of zero or negative growth, but these have generally been undesired and unstable periods. Without growth, profits and accumulation by capital holders come at the expense of other groups in society—intensifying economic inequalities and social tensions (83). Recession and depression are possible within capitalism; degrowth is probably not. Whereas in theory, growth may not be necessary or inevitable within capitalism, in practice, the system generates growth via dynamics of competition, private ownership, and the availability of cheap energy supply. Economic growth is also perceived as a political necessity to pacify social conflict and ensure reproduction of the system.
-   We can learn from noncapitalist societies that have lived long without growth; from countries and cities that adapt constructively to halted growth; and from groups within high-growth societies who live with little or no money, either by choice or by necessity 
-   Global economic growth is a nineteenth- and twentieth-century phenomenon, driven by historically unique sociocultural systems and values that developed in tandem with capitalism and colonialism (Section 2). During the preceding 200,000 years, many human populations thrived without growth. Long-enduring societies, such as Classical Greece, developed institutions, moral codes, and myths that tempered impulses for expansion (85), and expended surpluses in ceremonies and collective pursuits that reaffirmed social order as opposed to investing them to expand production (86). Scattered efforts to enlarge territories, markets, or resource use have led to processes and outcomes that historians characterize as the rise, fall, or collapse of civilizations.
-   Throughout human existence, diverse hunter-fisher-gatherers have maintained extremely low ecological footprints, rigorously measured in contemporary groups, such as the Andaman Islanders
-   Archaeological and genomic data show that hunter-gatherer communities living in the Kalahari for 70,000 years are the longest-enduring society on Earth
-   Revaluation and recuperation of non-Western traditions that can inform alternatives to growth-based development range from Maya-infused Zapatista projects in Mexico, to South African ideas of Ubuntu, to Buddhist-inspired economies of happiness in Bhutan (95). 
-   In India, Kothari (97) finds promise in grassroots local projects that exercise “radical ecological democracy” and that do not necessarily seek to scale up. Alternative forms of engaging larger-scale bioregional processes are evident in cases such as the Arvari River Parliament, formed by 72 riverine villages in western India, which meets regularly to make ecological, economic, and social decisions. In Latin America, the idea of “buen vivir,” nourished by deep cultural traditions that prioritize ecological balance and community wellbeing, has emerged as an alternative to developmentalism (1). Amid debates and conflicts around desired socio-ecological worlds, Bolivia and Ecuador have attempted to institutionalize aspects of this indigenous cosmology via national policies and programs.
-   Involuntary declines are not degrowth in themselves, and countries in recession or depression are not degrowth experiments, unless communities make a virtue out of necessity, building low-impact livelihoods that enhance wellbeing and equality
-   The city of Leipzig shrank continuously since 1966, and more quickly since 1989, until a recent upturn. As other cities struggled to reignite growth, Leipzig's authorities decided early on to adaptively manage contraction. They envisioned a dynamic, sustainable city that would preserve trademark architectural heritage, replace dilapidated housing with green spaces, and support microscale centers.
-   Schindler's (103) similar study of Detroit documents the breakdown of the city's “growth coalition” as authorities accepted the end of growth and embraced plans to invest in landscape infrastructure to improve residents’ quality of life. Schindler's description of communities’ efforts to reorganize amid collapse emphasizes the importance of the city's decision to declare bankruptcy, putting the interests of its citizens before those of banks and debtors.
-   Green growth: economic growth accompanied by a reduction of a society's throughput
- Cattaneo & Gavaldà (107) examine two degrowth-minded eco-communes in the outskirts of Barcelona and find that resource use and paid working time of participants have declined substantially. They argue that economic and material degrowth was not the objective, but rather a felicitous outcome of broader ambitions to colive autonomously and democratically, reviving and sharing common spaces. Around the world, place-based responses to climate change and peak oil have sprung up in the form of so-called transition towns. 
- Until recently, degrowth literature had little to say about technology other than a critique of technological fixes (see Section 3). However, thoughts on technology by twentieth-century philosophers Jacques Ellul and Ivan Illich have long influenced the conversation
- Ellul (110) argued that in modern societies a technological system has emerged with its own logic of reproduction, autonomized from social control. At the core is a scientific-industrial complex, which invents what can be invented and develops what can be developed without external considerations for the social purposes that new knowledge serves. Unlike most contemporary degrowth thinkers, Ellul went as far as claiming that profit-seeking, growth, and capitalism are epiphenomena of the technological system, not its driving forces.
- Illich (113) and Ellul agree that economic growth results from the inversion of tools from means into ends but differ in their responses. Illich advocated technologies that users can control, dismantle, repair, or reconstitute, conceptualized as spaces and tools for conviviality. Think of a bicycle compared to a nuclear power plant. 
- Lizarralde & Tyl (117) develop a practical, convivial approach for directly engaging designers, engineers, and other stakeholders in the development of new products and services. They introduce guidelines for integrating conviviality criteria into the design process with attention to relationships between the life-cycle stages of a product or service and the five main threats to conviviality identified by Illich (113). Criteria and constraints outlined in these recommendations prioritize users’ autonomy and creativity, local production, and the use of simple techniques. The aim of this design for conviviality approach is to enable designers and engineers to embrace complex design processes in the transition toward a degrowth society and to cocreate such a society with stakeholders
- Nowtopian urban initiatives, such as the Bike Kitchen, and community-driven spaces that experiment with digital technologies, such as makerspaces and hackerspaces (121, 122), offer alternatives to growth-oriented and technology-led visions of the “Smart City” (122). However, features of high or low technologies alone do not open alternative pathways—that depends on the wider political and cultural contexts in which they are embedded (121, 122). Today, the dominant trajectory of technological development is still geared around growth. Pollex & Lenschow (123) examine the EU's strategic Horizon 2020 program of R&D and find that the growth paradigm is dominant, marginally updated with green growth, and beyond GDP notions.
- Another trajectory is manifest in DGML (“design global, manufacture local”) processes through which design is developed, shared, and improved through global digital commons, in which shared resources are managed by a community according to rules set by the community (121). Manufacturing takes place locally, often through shared infrastructures, and the convergence of digital commons with local manufacturing technologies in products ranging from three-dimensional printers and laser cutters to low-tech tools and crafts is giving rise to new forms of value creation. Successful low-cost DGML projects include wind turbines, farming machines, and prosthetic robotic hands.
- DGML technologies have the potential to be low-cost, feasible for small-scale operations, and adjustable to local needs (125, 126). DGML technologies promote technological sovereignty, helping people—from farmers and artists to computer engineers and designers—to become more autonomous by controlling the manufacturing of their means of production.
- After the crises of the 1970s, neoliberal restructuring mobilized economic growth with a radically different normative order (136) rooted in globalization, deregulation of financial flows, and new modes of governing. Subjects were no longer formed as social citizens, but as individual entrepreneurs of themselves. This new growth path operates not only by occupying new territories both geographically and via the further commodification of former public sectors (education, public services), but also by mobilizing and appropriating the innovative energy and desires of workers in the culture industry and new digital and creative economies (137).
- According to Brown (136), the neoliberal program has dismantled the separation between the economic and the political by extending economistic and entrepreneurial logics of competition to all dimensions of social and public life, including the state. A novel variant of homo economicus, no longer the nineteenth-century merchant or man of trade, but a new entrepreneurial man, replaces homo politicus altogether, while the sphere in which discourses about the good life and social justice took place disappears. Thus, neoliberal rationality neutralizes normative foundations of liberal democracy, leading to a path of dedemocratization (136), where subjects are driven to act as personal enterprises, responsible for their own investments and failures (131).
- An ongoing crisis of growth, heightened by the global financial crisis of 2008, further jeopardizes the stability and legitimacy of liberal democracies
- In response to economic crisis, dedemocratization, and authoritarian postgrowth scenarios, degrowth thinkers imagine a radical social-ecological transformation (140) that forges new forms of democracy guided by (global) social and environmental justice, solidarity, and autonomy (6). This stream of degrowth excludes a mere return to the growth-dependent model of welfarist liberal democracies (6), addressing not only the environmental and structural consequences of neoliberal growth (Section 3), but also the pervasive logic of economism
- Referencing especially Gorz (145), degrowth thinkers and activists articulate a strong critique of techno-managerial modes of governance implemented under neoliberalism (141), against which self-management at different scales of societal organization strengthens collective autonomy.
- Models of direct democracy in degrowth discourse are inspired by Cornelius Castoriadis (141, 146). Democracy for him means that society becomes autonomous by recognizing and taking responsibility for its self-instituting character against the imposition of imaginaries based on nonquestionable truths coming from gods or immutable pseudoscientific laws, such as the invisible hand of the market, the selfish gene, or an economy's need to grow. For Castoriadis, democracy and capitalism are fundamentally incompatible, given that capitalism rests on heteronomous justifications, and their parallel evolution is coincidental.
- it remains unclear why and how diverse autonomous societies led by a direct democratic process of decision making would embrace the degrowth project in its substantial form (140, 147). Under current conditions, a transition to direct democracy in tandem with a decelerating economy is a highly unlikely scenario. 
- In the absence of social forces that can catalyze radical change, the scenario of stagnation and an authoritarian drift seems more likely. This underscores the importance of strengthening social movements and political tendencies aiming to revitalize democracy and politicize economics.
- In future degrowth societies envisioned in the literature examined here, the economic is no longer at the center of everything; democracy is direct; surplus is expended for reproduction or fun; income and wealth are distributed according to egalitarian principles; vital resources, infrastructures, and spaces are shared and held in common; technology is convivial and serves social purposes; resource throughput is minimized; and working hours are reduced by cutting consumption, production, and wasteful expenditures
- What Muraca (133) calls concrete utopias illuminate potential openings for paths forward that are already emerging.
- recent debates on the possibility of voluntary paths to degrowth versus the more probable event of forced reductions provoked by an involuntary crash (10, 77) is misleading (78). Change is always voluntary and is always enacted through unchosen conditions (such as the availability of fossil fuels or the thermodynamics of production processes). History is shaped by collective action or inaction

## Résumé

1. Economic growth is a recent social and political objective—GDP was first measured in the 1930s and growth entrenched as an overriding goal in the 1950s.
2. There is no empirical evidence of absolute decoupling of throughput from economic growth; sufficient decoupling to stay within environmental limits is logically possible, but physically unlikely.
3. Economic growth has long worked as the key dynamic stabilization mechanism for modern, capitalistic societies. The end of economic growth without social transformation would lead to destabilization.
4. Economies can be stabilized without growth if basic monetary, fiscal, labor, and welfare institutions are transformed (working hours are reduced, new investment in clean sectors is offset by disinvestment in dirty sectors, debt interest is spent or socialized, redistribution of wealth is secured, and growth in relational goods compensates for decline in material goods).
5. Capitalism as we know it is incompatible with degrowth.
6. Perpetual growth is ecologically limited and, in all likelihood, disastrous.
7. Planned degrowth is politically unlikely, given established interests and power relations.
8. An authoritarian and more unequal variant of capitalism is likely to emerge after a period of stagnation, unless social forces organize politically to produce more democratic alternatives.
9. Human history offers myriad examples of noncapitalist societies, and of community economies not based on capitalist relations, that have lived well without growth.
10. Appropriate and “design global, manufacture local” technologies can provide localized solutions to human needs, while degrowing throughput.
